Well, good morning and welcome
to the Social Services Community Select Committee.
Uh, this morning we have the Independence Children's
Monitor, the children's
Commissioner, uh, with the committee.
And, uh, we, we are looking into the report
of the controller and auditor general inquiry into
procurement contract management.
And after, um, hearing some earlier evidence, we're keen
to hear from you both.
Uh, so, um, what we might do is just, um, if you wanted
to make some opening comments and then we'll open up
questions from members that works.
Okay. And I here, Mr.
Chair, and thank you,
uh, for the invitation for us to meet with you today.
In my role as children's Commissioner, I want
to see all children in ALT
and New Zealand flourish to their full potential.
And that includes all children
and young people in the orang system, services,
and, uh, programs
and supports that they receive through this system
directly impact on their rights and their wellbeing.
My advocacy in this space is informed strongly by the views
and lived experience of children
and young people in this system.
And by the evidence
and information that I received from my oversight
of Warga Tamari colleagues, including in Roki, tamari,
the Independent Children's Monitor in the Office
of the Ombudsman in relation
to Oranga Tamari's Contracting
and procurement, uh, process and management.
My focus has been squarely on seeking to understand
how oranga tamari factors the needs, rights of children
into its decision making.
I've been focused on advocating for children's rights
and needs to be at the heart of every single one
of these decisions together with aki.
I have raised concerns around the way
that funding decisions were made by Oranga Tamari last year,
and the very real impacts that these have had on access
to services for children
and young people, families and hanau.
I want to make a couple of other, um,
points beforehand handing to Erin, it's crucial in my view
that we must take a view now
and into the future that weave stronger safety nets
for children in alt in New Zealand
because the stakes are simply too high for us not to do so.
I've been vocal about my significant concerns when it comes
to child maltreatment in this country,
and this continues to be evidenced by our high rate
of child homicide in this country, including this year
where a number of very, very young children
have been killed by homicide.
I'm very concerned about the gaps
that have been opened up in the safety nets around children.
And I emphasize the need for us
to weave these safety nets ever stronger around children
when it comes to our country's children
and how we make decisions.
Evidence matters. It really does.
Yes, the system is complex,
but a holistic view is required of children's lives
and careful decision making that pays attention to evidence
of what works and what is needed.
Procurement and contracting processes impacting tamari
and their wau must be fair, transparent,
and grounded in children's rights and best interests.
And when addressing our huge societal problems
around poverty, around mental health, housing addiction,
and family violence, we do need
to take a children's rights approach.
And then the final point I want
to make this morning is it is crucial
that ordering a tamari acts on the recommendations
of the Office of the Auditor General's inquiry report,
ensuring that children's rights
and needs are kept central in all decision making in
relation to its contracting and procurement processes.
And I want to see Ang Tamari ground its future work in this,
um, regard in detailed analysis
of the impacts on children giving careful consideration
to their needs and rights.
It is encouraging in my view
that Ang Tamari leadership has accepted the report's
recommendations and taken steps already
to improve governance, contract management
and program delivery.
But I really do want to emphasize how important rebuilding
of trust is to this process.
Only high trust
and working in a truly partnered way
with the wider children's sector will lead
to those strongest safety needs
for children. I'll hand to you.
Thanks Claire. Um, Koto, um, just a couple of, um,
comments from Lee before we can take your questions.
But, um, first I just, um,
the auditor General's report certainly reflects the concerns
that Claire and I raised, um, in mid 2024 with Ang tam.
Um, and we were pleased to see, um,
and proceed with this report and the outcome.
Um, recently I've heard about progress
that Ang Tamari are making in response to that report,
and that is positive, um, particularly in terms
of recommendations one and two of that report.
Um, notably they've been preparing a strategy
for their procurement, um,
and they've certainly improved the level of engagement
and consultation with the sector.
Um, so that I'm hearing that from the sector about the
positive improvement they're making.
Um, however, the strategy,
and I, I did watch the presentation from them
to this committee in terms of where they're heading, um,
certainly reflects the social
sector commissioning principles.
There's nothing new there, it's just good practice
and it's certainly something that should have been followed.
Um, if it had, we may not have got to where we are.
Um, and as Claire mentioned, you know, trust, um,
comes down in the elevator, but it goes up a staircase.
And so I think Oranga,
tamari started walking up those stairs.
Um, but there is still a way to go
and they must demonstrate their words with actions.
Now, I think the challenge for them though,
in looking at their strategy is how do they get ahead
of the contract expires?
So I think Benicia, when she was here,
was talking about an 18 month runway in terms of planning
and making decisions around contracts.
Um, but when you have contracts
that are expiring in December
and then again in June next year, how do they get the time
and the space to make those proper decisions
to get a really good understanding of need and community
and then putting the services in place to respond to it.
Um, and so that takes time.
And what's needed is a period of stability for ang tamari
so they can do that and make those, um, detailed decisions.
And I think, um, the last point I'll make is
that it must also be remembered that
although, um, some contracts were extended through
to December this year, others have ended
or faced funding cuts.
And we hear about the impact of those cuts
through our monitoring in communities.
Um, they are broad.
Um, they include cuts to transition support,
disability services, youth justice intervention programs,
counseling and therapy, for example.
Um, cutting services not only in terms
of their contracted spend,
but also restrictions on spending within Ang Tamari makes it
difficult for social workers to do their job
and to connect whanau
and children up with the right services.
This also impacts on their ability to recruit caregivers
because the supports aren't always there
to support caregivers as well.
Um, we hear about Ang Tamari asking
for favors from providers, asking them to do more with less.
Um, and also there've been delays in payments,
but I know that they're addressing that now.
I think the learning is,
or at least, um, a point I'd just like to make at the end is
that some of the cutting of, um, services
or reduction in services
that operate in the prevention space run counter
to an investment approach.
And our recent report on outcomes from Maori shows
that the further that tamari he go through the system,
the worse their outcomes are.
So there's an imperative that we can put services in place
to help families in hanana at the stage
to prevent the downward costs, not only in economic terms,
but also in terms of human terms.
And I think I'll just finish with the one one quote from,
um, our monitoring,
our recent monitoring from the Bay of Plenty.
And this is what happens when you follow a process
that doesn't properly consider the needs of children
who don't communicate
and plan, um,
your transition when you're decommissioning services.
And it's, um, a Copa Maori organization,
um, that told us this.
Our kids are hearing on the news about funding cuts
and have mentioned running away
so they won't be kicked out of here.
How do you manage those conversations when they're worried
about the place closing?
So I just, we need to always make sure we are listening
to the voices of the kids
and the impact that these decisions can have.
And if you carry out a desk-based exercise without
understanding the implications,
these can be the consequences.
So thank you.
Thank you. Uh, first question. He thank you.
I actually have thousands of questions for you,
so I'm gonna try and contain this one,
but I would like to ask some very different questions.
So I'll go right back on the list.
Um, the first question I wanna ask is, one
of the disturbing things I heard when I was talking to
itself about this, and they didn't mean it to be,
was they said that the organization is only
for children in care.
And one of the things I saw in this report was, or, and,
and the behavior that led to the report was, um, the cutting
of funding to something like the family center up in
Auckland, um, in North Shore.
And that really works with where those children
will be at risk if we don't do something about it.
You've just talked about that preventative work.
Do you think that have a
wide enough brief or are they narrowing it themselves
because they're overwhelmed by the need out there?
Um, okay. So I think, um, certainly at the time
that was one of the questions we were asking
to get clarity about the strategy.
And there were certainly mixed messages
and, um, comments being made, um, about
what the strategy was and what the focus was.
So in particular where they really focusing in on their
statutory responsibilities
and care, um, at the expense of some
of this early intervention prevention work.
And so we've had reassurances that that's not the case, um,
that they're continuing to fund those programs.
But I think the conversation needs to be had
or is probably being had is what is Ang tamari's role?
Are they there to focus on Tamari in care
or even wider still those tamari that are known to them
through points of concern that could be their focus area.
And that's not to say that programs
and services that focus on early intervention, those kids
that are at risk of becoming known aren't important.
The challenges across all agency,
who is going to pay for that?
Who is responsible for those services
to make sure that they continue?
And one of the risks that we saw last year was
that those conversations weren't necessarily happening,
or tamari were potentially going
to make decisions in a silo without having conversations
across the sector about, well, if we step out of this,
if we step out of this space,
we're not saying the service doesn't have value,
who can step in and pick it up and fund it.
And I think that remains a challenge.
And as part of the conversation with the, um, establishment
of, um, a social investment agency
and what services they may fund from there,
My follow up on this is I looked at, um, Australia
and they have a focus on children, which is quite different.
Do you think when you look at all the agencies
that we've got in your own roles as well, we have enough
actual clarity about the ownership
of issues over the safety of children.
We have like terrible death rates. What's going wrong?
I mean, in my view, uh, to that question,
more needs to be done.
The starting point for that is actually a collective, uh,
decision in this country to prioritize children.
Yes. To put the needs and the rights of central.
And first, uh, we know that if we, um, want to, uh,
have a thriving, um, New Zealand into the future,
it actually all starts
with our children and our young people.
And so investment in them from the very earliest years
of their lives is absolutely crucial.
Do we need to do more? Yes.
I think we need a more joined up approach across our
children's system, as Aaron has spoken about.
If that joined up approach had been taken in regard
to the contracting
and procurement process last year, I believe that, uh,
things wouldn't have landed in where they did.
I also think that it's crucial that we have a cross
party commitment.
I knew that at our parliamentary, uh, system
and level where actually we agree on some
of the central tenets of what our child protection system
needs to do, what it exists for and how it works.
Yes. Uh, and I think we are still
quite a long way from that.
And so I urge you all across, um, parliament,
It also costs money, doesn't it?
It, I mean, the Australians are spending $312 million
on just that strategy on children.
We just haven't put any money into it, have we?
I think we have invested money in this area. Yeah.
However, I think that, um, over we need
to have a holistic view.
Um, if we look at our annual budget in this country,
for example, that's why I really advocate for us
to take a children's rights approach to our public budget so
that we can join the dots
and see the whole picture of the amount of investment
that goes into children.
And we need to see that across the children's system when it
comes to our care and protection
and youth justice system as well.
Thank you. I'll come To Laura next.
Oh, thank you. Um, Mr.
Chair and thank you guys for coming in this morning.
Um, I've got a couple of questions.
I guess my first one would be, um, around
the orangutan who's handling of, um, previous procurement
prior to this particular, um, incident.
We all know that this was not great, um,
the way in which they've handled the contracts.
Um, but from looking further back, it seems
that they've always had a bit of a problem
with contract management.
And that's not just orangutan like MSD
across this whole social network.
And I've been hearing in certain communities about like,
overlap of contracts, contracts not fit
for purpose for delivery.
So people kind of manipulating them to get the outcomes
for the community, um, working on outputs, not outcomes.
Yeah. Um, would you be able to give me a bit
of your reflection on that and how you think
it would be best suited to be working in that space?
Like what would you, you know, what would you expect them
to look for in new contracts, for example?
And is this like actually more
of a historic problem, not just,
Yeah, I think that that's a fair comment in terms
of being, um, consistent challenges
with social service procurement.
Um, one, one
of the things is a particularly complicated area,
and so you can contract a particular service.
Um, but then to attribute, um, outcomes
or outputs to that service can be a challenge
because there are a lot of things
that are impacting that family's life.
Mm-hmm. So at a simple level, you can quickly see an output.
So did you visit the family?
How many times have you visited?
That's quite simple, straightforward.
But if you then lift up to a success factor,
which might be a reduction in notifications to Ang
and attributing that to that service
and basing that just on the,
the data alone can be quite a challenge.
And then if you want to go to an outcome level
and look at what the outcomes are,
they've even further removed from that particular service.
So there are real challenges with trying
to get clarity over what is working.
That's why it's really important that we consider both the,
the stories and the experiences of the people
who are both working and receiving the services
and combining it with that data.
And that's the challenge. And that does take some time.
Um, I think the other challenge is the maturity
of the commissioning process.
We've never got to the point of, um, the maturity
where you could do it really well.
And we talk about it.
Um, and I think, um, orang, tamari may have alluded
to it in their presentation, what you really want
to do is have a really good understanding in a community
or a region about the need.
Yep. And then you meet with the community
and say, what are the services we need collectively
to respond to those needs?
Rather than dealing with providers as individuals
and playing one off against the other.
You do it in a collective way
and you have a conversation now that requires the maturity
of the organization, but also of those
providers in the community to be willing
to do it and work in that way.
And we certainly hear from 'em.
They're willing to do it is a classic example.
So when, um, funding cuts were made last year, um,
got the providers together
and said, don't talk to us individually about the changes.
Talk to us as a collective.
We all help you so solve this problem
and tell you what needs to be done.
And that's a much more mature way of operating
and that's where we need to get to.
And then you need to give them time to deliver.
So you then don't expect changes within a year.
'cause like I said, these are complex situations
and they take time and you look, need to look at success
by both the output at success factor
and then ultimately an outcome level
and combine all that with the stories of the experience.
Because sometimes you just know the thing is working,
even if you don't necessarily have the evidence.
Mm. Or you might, the the issue
with it may be a problem with the referral process.
So you can look at something and go, well,
the referral rate isn't high.
You can make a desk based exercise that
that service isn't responding.
But if you actually go and understand why the referral
process isn't working, you get a different picture.
And I think that's where the maturity level needs to be.
It takes time and care to do it well.
And I don't think we've had the time and the space to do it.
And that's what needs to happen. And that's
what I mean by period of stability.
Good. I really quickly, um, thank you for that answer.
Do you think Arun Meki has like the systems,
like the technology, the people, um, in order
to get this procurement process, right?
Because like we're talking about potentially a system
that needs to be able to track a lot
of information at one time.
Um, also talking to organizations on the ground,
particularly the smaller ones, they really struggle
with reporting and things like that
because, you know, they're out there doing
the money in the community
and it's not really like their specialty niche to be,
you know, filling in all kinds of different things.
Um, so do you think that one,
we've got those potentially those metrics, right?
I know you've talked about outcomes and outputs.
I know there's heaps of outputs
and honestly like some of 'em are ridiculous, um,
that I've seen, you know, some of the organizations having
to do and the outputs section of things.
Um, but do you think that OT has that capability to be able
to like actually do this correctly?
Whether that is technology, um, whether that is personnel,
Probably two points there. I think,
um, I think you're right.
And you mentioned about providers having multiple contracts.
They could have 17, 18 contracts they're administering
and the cost involved in that is, is huge, right?
It's an ft. Yeah. Um, that's right.
And that's what we hear about.
And I think, um, and then the challenge of that
of course is they know what is actually needed.
And so they use that money to deliver
what they know is needed Mm.
As opposed to necessarily the the contract,
um, specifications.
And so this is why there's a, a, a, a requirement
that you actually listen to the community about
what is required and put
that in place rather than potentially
what you think might be needed from,
from here in Wellington.
Yeah. I think in terms of,
is there the data and information available?
No, not to the extent that people would like,
I think there's a risk here.
Um, certainly a real good opportunity
with the social investment agency to be able to do some of
that stuff on behalf of, of agencies
or behalf of regions and communities.
That's a positive. I think there's a risk what's happened in
Australia, but in terms of the demand for, um, uh,
proving a return on investment
for a particular service is it's grown an industry
around how do we do this?
And that takes money and time again from providers
and it's money and time they don't necessarily have
because, um, contracts don't necessarily provide for
that capability build to do that.
And so there is a challenge, but I think you can still do
best endeavors if you actually go out and listen
and understand, um, what services are actually achieving
and listen and understand from providers
and then go with them, support them to do the work. Yeah.
Thank You. I wanted ask a supplementary on this, um,
because I've asked a number of times, you know,
interest is this outcomes versus outputs differentiation.
And I think everyone agrees, yes, we need
to focus on outcomes, but I think these are from,
I've never really clearly articulated what
good looks like mm-hmm.
In terms of outcomes. And under underlying that is that
for a very long time in New Zealand, we've had one
of the worst rates of child abuse
and child homicide in the developed world.
So we've got this, this longstanding structural challenge
in New Zealand, and then we have the data and, and,
and all these different organizations trying to do something
that I, I don't feel if we've ever managed to get the, get
adequate data and there's issues around privacy
that they need to work through and,
and, you know, sovereignty around date sovereignty
and all this, how, how any thoughts on
how we can better integrate this to address this very,
very longstanding deep structural problem in New Zealand.
From my perspective, a key starting point there in terms
of actually understanding what good outcomes look like
is exactly what Aaron was speaking about,
really focusing in on listening to the needs of children,
young people, and whanau truly starting there,
building on that understanding.
So it flips things, um, on the head.
I guess a little bit in terms of the start point now is
that a lot of these decisions tend to come from the center,
so to speak, whereas actually we need to go to
that local level
and the regional level to truly understand
what those needs are.
I agree with you, Mr.
Chair, that there is a gap when it comes
to truly comprehensive
and integrated data around understanding the prevalence
of the issues of child maltreatment in this country.
That's why I advocate for New Zealand
to undertake a child maltreatment study like Australia has
over the past few years that has actually led to, um,
their decision making around some of these approaches
to addressing child maltreatment being much more
evidence led and informed.
And I think we would do well to, uh, take
that similar approach.
And then if I can, I just want to pick up on, um, Ms.
McClure's, um, earlier question.
I want to acknowledge that, uh, she is right.
These issues around orang,
tamari contracting predate last year,
and I had a had a close view into this, um,
before coming into my current role as the former CEO
of social service providers.
So if we go back to the 2022 contracting
and procurement round, there were also significant, uh,
issues at that time.
I think last year we saw those go to an even, um,
more significant, um, level.
But for me, a couple of things really stand out.
Uh, a lack of really solid
and transparent communications between orang,
tamari and its partners.
Um, a lack of true respect for the partnership
that must exist in our child protection system
between the Crown and Maori and the Crown
and its wider NGO children's sector partners
and also, um, a lack of holistic attention
to understanding children's needs, both from a qualitative
and a quantitative data perspective.
So these are issues that yes, have been longstanding.
It is crucial that we now actually, um,
see these recommendations of the Auditor General's report,
um, implemented because if they are implemented,
that will make a positive difference for children
and out care and protection and youth justice system.
Yeah. And I think in terms of the need for data
and part of our role, and we see it in our reports, is
to provide, um, yourselves
with a view both in the quantitative and the story space
and combining the two together so
that our recent outcomes from our report got some
outcomes level information in it for you.
And some of that information is new.
So we, um, presented to the police here and they thanked us
because actually some of the Youth justice information is
the first time they'd seen data about these young people
and the outcomes that they are, um, um,
uh, uh, receiving.
Um, and that's really important
because it helps to drive better decision
making, but it's really important.
We don't just focus on outcomes,
but you need to have data points all along the way.
So, like I said, the out point level success
and then then outcome
and you know, that, that there's that, um,
data point that is crucial.
I think the most crucial in that report was to understand
that kids that actually offend, go on to offend, 93%
of them have had care
and protection concerns raised about them in the past.
And so there's your opportunity for an investment approach.
If you can get it right at the earliest opportunity,
then you might reduce the offending
and reduce the number of victims of crime at the same time.
That's your opportunity. And we will continue
to measure this and continue to provide you with information
so you can see if change is occurring,
but we need to be patient because it will take time.
And I think this then speaks
to Claire's point about having crossed party agreement on
the strategy so that that doesn't deviate
between election cycles.
'cause when that happens, it makes it even
harder to achieve these outcomes.
Thank you. Um, and thank you both here.
Um, I'd like to go back list as well for another primary
after this, and I have five supplementaries.
Um, the auditor general found that
made contracting decisions in 4 25 without knowing
how many tamari or whanau would be affected
or whether services would remain accessible.
And that's on page 47 and 48 of the OAG report.
At the same time,
we have seen a 34.5% increase in reports
of concern affecting over 59,000 tam.
And that's on page three of the understanding reports
of concern during 2025.
In your view, what is driving the search?
Is it cuts to the front line and back office staff
or the failure to implement the kind
of child-focused analysis?
The auditor General Recomme?
Um, oh, did you want, okay.
I was gonna say, um, we've,
we've got a report coming out soon, um,
which follows up on the Dan Carrum Pati review.
And we are looking again at the reports of concern
and how those are managed with,
so there'll bit more information on that then.
But I think in terms of, I first speak about the increase in
reports of concern that we're seeing,
I think it's due to a range of factors.
So, um, the Amman made a, um,
decision about the way Ang tamari were recording contacts.
So they were, um, treating, um, um, phone conversations
as contact records for some children as opposed
to treating them as reports of concern.
So that's a practice change.
And that will be partly due to,
I think they recognize it's about at least a quarter
of the increases just due to a change in reporting.
Um, so it's not an increase in actual reports a concern,
I think you'll have a range of factors going in.
One will be, um, from potentially a reduction in services
and support for families,
but also it'll be wider socioeconomic factors as well
that are influencing, um, an increase.
Um, and it's certainly an increase in reports of concern,
but it's also an increase in the number of tamari
that are known, although that's not quite as high, um,
as the reports are concerned.
So within it, you're seeing re notifications
and this is what I mean by about investing at the earliest
opportunity and a measure for success.
If you can get a service in place for the whanau
that then prevents a further reification,
reduces the burden on order a tamari and keeps kids safer.
So it's all of those things that are playing out within it.
Mm-hmm.
And I agree, it's absolutely multifaceted.
We can't point to one particular thing.
Our child protection system has been under pressure
for many years, um, before 2024.
Yes. We know that there have been
added pressures on that system.
We've seen, um, a restructure to ang Tamari.
We have seen the impacts of these funding
and contracting decisions.
But we do need to couch that in a broader context.
And as Aaron said, um, the many socioeconomic factors
that impact directly on children's lives
and on whanau lives.
Um, we know that the cost of living crisis
has affected everyone in this country,
but especially for our low income families
and whanau, the impacts continue to be huge.
And we only have to look at this year's child poverty
reduction statistics.
Yeah. To see that we continue
to track in the wrong direction.
Um, I want to see us truly commit
to addressing child poverty in this country.
Um, because in a small, wealthy nation
as we are relatively speaking,
we simply shouldn't have such high numbers
of children, uh, living in poverty.
And whilst poverty is not determinative of, um,
children being maltreated, we do know
that poverty places huge stresses on families in Hanau.
And so if we go
to the prevention discussion that we are having mm-hmm.
That's why we must join the dots here
and actually recognize that, um, you know, that's
where we need to pay attention.
Also, I really want us to not forget the long tail impacts
of the COVID-19 pandemic
and the ripple effects that it continues
to have in the lives of children and their families in.
Thank you. Um, so how concerned are you
that the forecast 182 million in further cuts over the next
four years will worsen Ang Tam's ability
to respond effectively if reports of concern?
I think, um, the challenge again is report concern is made
and then an assessment's made that something needs
to be done either for the w or for that young person.
Right. And it's then the need
to actually have those services available.
And so if those are being reduced
and it places, um, pressure not only on Ang Tamari staff
to do what they know is needed,
but then it also places, um, challenges on the whanau
and the young person, which can play out into,
like I just described before,
further involvement in the system.
And I'll give you a, a quote from, um,
Ang Tamari staff themselves.
And this comes from the Bay
of Plenty following the contract, um, reduction.
So we no longer have a list of providers in toga
who have had their contract renewed.
We are making referrals and hoping for the best.
And this is where they're talking about local
supported bail providers.
Yep. So we now have a 12 week waiting list,
and it's likely to increase, um, in the email it said it was
because Ang he cut our contracts, we lean on them.
This is a provider speaking
and have done a fabulous job for whanau
and working with kids in hiring complex needs.
So this is where the services just aren't available.
And this could be mentors or supported bail.
And so the, and what the implication of that is,
is I've got another quote from here is that they're left,
they're then left to support that young person.
And then they described
because they couldn't keep them occupied,
they then went on to offend.
'cause the services weren't in place to support them.
And once they offend,
suddenly the services get put in place.
And so the point is it shouldn't take someone to offend
before the system can actually
respond and provide the needs.
Those were needed in this at the time
that they were on subjected bail.
And this is the challenge of services continue to get cut.
And what really concerns me is
what we see laid out in Ang Tam's, recent reports
of concern report, where number
of those measures it is saying that it is going
to be significantly under pressure to be able to respond.
Its ability to respond to the volume modeled,
volume predicted of reports of concern.
Mm-hmm. And so what I really want to see there is a whole
of children's system response that recognizes that,
as I said publicly when that report was published,
this is Ang tam itself sounding the alarm about the pressure
on our child protection system.
And actually the whole of the children's system needs
to come together and respond with urgency, um, so
that we don't end up in a situation
where our child protection system goes under that pressure
that is being predicted.
I'll just ask one more. Yeah.
I said five, but I was so at three. What if you waiting?
Yeah. Um, so should
independent child impact assessments be required
before any further contracting or budget decisions?
In my view, a core aspect
of Orang Tamari's decision making actually in relation
to all its decision making,
but including in relation to its procurement
and contracting decision making is to have a clear approach
to, uh, understanding the impact
of its decisions on the children
that will be affected by those decisions.
And that is at both ends of decision making.
So decision making in relation to, um,
putting in place new contracts, for example,
and new services and, um, procuring new services as well
as decisions to deinvest or decommission services.
Because absolutely over time in our social sector,
more widely decisions will be taken to decommission
or divest in particular services.
But my concern when it comes to children is how their needs
and their rights are taken into account in
that decision making process.
Mm-hmm. And I think for me, the,
the statement in the auditor general's report that stood out
to me so starkly was this one, we did not see evidence that
understood how its decisions would affect
children and their families.
So order Tamari
and our wider children's system that contracts services
that impact on children need to really pay attention to
that finding of the auditor general's report
and actually learn from that and put in place systems
and processes that have a clear
and transparent approach to understanding children's needs
and factor factoring their needs
and rights into those decisions.
We've got. Maureen, uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, it feels like a big question,
but we talk about ot, which
by very existence is the ambulance at
the bottom of the cliff.
So if we were to look at the fence at the top,
what are the things that miss are missing that, that have
so many children born into poverty?
You know, should we be talking more about
contraception at that point?
Or why is it that we have so many parents who are struggling
to be good parents?
You know, where is the education
need at the top of the cliff?
Um, it just seems that we're, we are fighting,
it's like lemmings falling off the cliff.
You know, we're fighting that always at the bottom.
What can we do Yeah. To actually prevent it?
Um, that's a good point.
I was gonna add that onto what Bruce said.
'cause of course what I'm tamari can't control
what comes through the front door.
And so an increase in reports of concern is
because, um, there's been something else going on,
a failure, um, somewhere else
to probably support families or to support the children.
And that's, you know, other agencies involvement.
But also you've got wider, like we said
before, socioeconomic, um, conditions
that could be driving this.
We've got intergenerational aspects of harm, um,
that are compounding the issue.
And if I was to stand back
and say, I think we're at the point of we are just managing,
um, the issue to the next generation
without really prioritizing sufficiently to get in there
and do things that will actually help
prevent children coming to the attention
of Ang tamari in the first place.
But then also when they do have, we got the proper systems,
services and supports to be put in place to address, um,
the issues that are presenting so
that they don't then go on into further generations.
It's critical and it does feel like we are just managing
this across to the next generation without actually dealing
with it in a significant way.
And I think, you know, we used to,
we talk about New Zealand being one
of the greatest places in the world to raise children,
but I do question whether we are perhaps kidding ourselves
to a degree, particularly when you look at the rate that
with which children are killed through homicide.
Again, since, um, the death of Malachi Soup b***h,
we have seen 24 other children killed by homicide.
The hands of people who were there,
um, there to care for them.
And that's the tragedy, right?
And that's the challenge for us to do better.
And, um, yes, it is a big question,
but it is such an important one.
Uh, and in my view, um, to add on to what Aaron has said,
it really goes to us needing to do so much better
to uphold the fundamental very basic minimum
rights of all children.
You know, the UN convention on the rights
of the child sets these out really clearly.
These are the promises that this country has made
to all children under the age of 18
that we are still not focusing on enough.
If we attend to those, I think we start to get things right.
Um, in my view, you know, income levels in this country, uh,
for families in whanau, we need to look at those, um,
because they simply haven't kept pace
with the high cost of living.
We also need to ensure that housing is affordable and safe
and secure for children in New Zealand.
Uh, we need to value better the role of families in Wau
and we support around them
and recognizing that, um, what could be more important than,
you know, nourishing, uh, the youngest, um, coming through.
And then I think as well,
investing in healthy relationship education for our children
and young people so that from the earliest stage
of childhood children are growing up with an understanding
of what healthy and respectful relationships look like.
I do think though, and here's a hopeful note, that the child
and youth strategy identifies three key priorities
that I believe are the right ones right now,
and I believe will be the right ones on an enduring basis
for a certain time to come.
And if we focus investment resourcing
and attention to those three priorities, so the importance
of the first 2000 days of children's lives
addressing child maltreatment in a multifaceted way
and reducing child material hardship,
that those three things would go a long way
to addressing the question that the member raises.
Thank you. Um, Mariano,
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, Mor, nato, um, I've got three pages of notes, um,
but I'm not going to use, use all of that, but I,
but what I've noticed in the conversation this morning is
this, we are beginning with contracts
and procurement, then we've gone into, um, um,
into the practice of it all and how it's all gets done.
Mm-hmm. And then, and then I, I've listed
that then I've listed capability
and I think, um, it's such a big, big question.
These questions are big questions
for 45 minutes, so I wish we had more.
Um, just to add
to the conversation about the fence at the top,
I think I'm more interested in removing
the cliff altogether.
So there's no fences at the top or the bottom,
but the cliff is removed.
If I said to you that the cliff is made up of, um,
fundamental, um, ignorance, racism,
and all of those that equal poverty, which e which, what,
what might you say to that question?
And um, and then, and then if I can, Mr.
Chair, I wanna just reflect a little back on 35 years ago
was a, was a great piece of reading
that very few people really recognize now,
but back then it had good ideas, 13 recommendations,
which even today they sound the same,
but still very little has been done in my view, to sustain
to, to bring those to light and sustain them.
And I'm talking specifically about Una Maori all
no question where my attention is.
And I wanted to, and just recognizing clear your opening
statements about child homicide and, and,
and not that poverty is a determinative,
really appreciating those things.
I know that, uh, piece of work and um, uh,
and I just wanted to acknowledge
how you understood it and tabled it.
Um, but to the end of two and today, I,
and if I'm talking about contracting
and procurement, I, there, I, I don't see
that much has really changed
and the practice of it all, of how it's applied, it doesn't
seem to me, and I was just Laura listening to your call
or Laura McClure, I just, you are so right.
I mean, there are things around outputs versus outcomes.
I mean, that's a debate we've been having
for years in the sector.
So I, yeah, I dunno whether my discussion's very helpful,
but my questions, I wouldn't mind getting some
of your views on it.
Um, I was not at all impressed
with the O2 A OT presentation last time.
I was not, uh, confident at all
with much of their conversation.
I couldn't get to a high trust place, unfortunately,
because it questions whether there's a
trustworthiness in the system at all.
So yeah. Sorry, that's a lot of conversation.
I hope you can peel out some questions
and help me understand where we're at.
Thank you
Committee, um, you referenced,
and for me, um, this continues
to be a touch point when it comes to the things that need
to change in our child protection system in New Zealand.
Uh, that, um, visionary report, uh,
as important reading for every single one
of us in this country who are working in this system,
but also who have an interest in children.
The report, um, TU was very clear about the structural
racism and discrimination that exists, um, in that system.
Uh, I believe that we still have a long way to go
to truly address those things.
I spend a lot of my time
as children's commissioner out in communities around the tu,
uh, with Una, including Maori Maori.
And I hear directly from them about the impacts,
the everyday impacts of racism
and discrimination in their lives.
And we only have to look at what the data shows us to see
that, um, Maori continue year on year
to be overrepresented, um, in our care and protection
and youth justice system.
It does not have to be this way though.
I have seen so many hopeful examples
of work in action right now in communities up
and down this country being led out by Iwi, hapu
and Kapa Maori organizations in the social service space
that really bring to life the promise of te
the promise of the iwi Maori and Crown relationship.
Uh, and that bring to life, I believe
TKI for Maori.
And I think that we would do well in this country to serve
Una Maori by continuing
to build on the strengths of those things.
And to listening to Mauna themselves who tell us
that we all have a role to play in addressing the racism
and discrimination that affects their lives
Members. We, we
are over time,
but if, if everyone's comfortable,
we can go a little bit longer if, if you're available for
Thank You. That's
really good. It's such a good
Conversation, I think Supplementary on this.
Um, thank you. So from the commissioner
and Monitor's perspectives, what concrete steps should ang
take to rebuild that trust that, um,
was talked about in these reports
and capacity with Copa Maori providers
and ensure Maori tamari outcomes are improved?
Um, I think, as I said in my opening,
you've gotta demonstrate words with actions, um,
because you know, and,
and off to a good start in terms of listening and,
and communication,
but it's the action that that matters at the end of the day.
Um, we've always,
through our monitoring over the last five years, I guess
a strong sense I get is sometimes government agencies feel
like they need to lead and make decisions,
and I think at times, um, they just need to follow
and to listen and
to support rather than feeling like they're the
ones that need to lead.
Um, there's a wonderful quote someone told me.
Sometimes Ang Tamari
and other government agencies need
to be in the backseat of the car.
Sometimes they don't even need to be in the car.
It's okay, we've got this. Just support us.
And as Claire said, there are plenty of examples of
emerging, um, initiatives
and practice that has gone on for a number of years
that aren't been successful.
It's a matter of being able
to build on those and support them.
Um, and some of those examples are in our reports.
Um, you know, um,
and we'll talk to this again as we go around, the more to
and further reports about what appears to be working.
But the secret ingredient is always, um,
fantastic people working with other fantastic people
and being given the license to get on
and do the work without undue interference.
And I think that's really good.
And three things from my perspective, first of all,
recognizing that at its heart, this is about
faa it is about needing to embrace relational, uh,
commissioning and contracting approaches with, uh, its,
um, Maori partners.
Secondly, it's about listening, um, to, uh,
its Maori partners around what is actually working
and what the aspirations
of whanau ha iwi are.
And then thirdly, listening to the lived experiences
and insights of Una Maori who have been in the orang system.
Orang itself has a youth advisory group.
Uh, many of those Una Maori
needs to continue to really listen to what those
are saying and sharing in terms of, um, their needs
and how they want the system to be responsive.
Uh, last year's or youth advisory group was instrumental
in co-designing heta, which is orang Tamara's, um,
performance system, um, outcomes framework.
Uh, and so I really want
to see Orang Tam leaning into actually implementing
heta in practice
because I believe if it does, so it will give life
to the aspirations of Maori given that
that framework has been shaped by them.
The other, the other thing that's really important just
to finish off is that, um, you know, ang tamari have, um,
a strategy in terms of their strategic partners
and enabling communities and those, that's all positive,
but you've gotta be careful that you don't undercut, um,
progress with those by decisions you make
around contracted services that sit outside it,
but actually that those initiatives rely on, right?
So you can continue
to support an enabling community initiative,
but actually if you cut, um, services
that maybe aren't Copa Maori, but it could be health
or, um, counseling services that they actually rely on,
then you end up undercutting that initiative.
So you've gotta be very careful in
terms of the decisions that you make. Yeah. 'cause
Like, or There's couple stuff between Willie.
So,
Um, now I'm gonna go two different ways,
but my, my start really is to try
and ground it back in what we learned from that report.
Am I hearing from you that the shattering of the certainty
of contracts, the fact that people are, I,
I know are still waiting to have their contract confirmed
that they're being asked to do too much
and that they haven't got a decent code around that of
good faith, relational kind of structures,
is undermining some of the creative, innovative
local solutions that would actually
save lives in this country?
I think a lack of certainty will always be a consideration
and a challenge for a providers.
So for example, in you've got a har POI initiative
where you've got, um, managing
or, um, the, the reports of concern that just better served
by a community response,
but that's an initiative that's on a
rolling six month contract.
Yeah. And so how do you, um, um, recruit Kai Mahi to work on
that initiative where you've only got six months
of certainty and I get you've gotta start
with the pilot cautiously,
but there's gotta be a time in which you can actually start
to push some of these parameters out so
that the organization can actually properly plan, uh,
for the future and put the things in place so it can be
as successful as it can be.
Yeah, it's a challenge. Thank
You. Stop.
Yeah, thank you. Just to s on that, um,
when we hear from ot, whether it was in our last hearing
or an annual reviews,
we often talk about devolving services to community.
Like that is the goal, right?
Um, community iwi all lead these kind
of response from ground up.
They often tell us that they're not ready sometimes.
Are they being, do you think too risk adverse in that?
Or do you think, again, it's that government control aspect,
like not wanting to actually, um, devolve that control down?
Or do you think genuinely some communities aren't
ready to handle that?
I mean, I'm trying to, trying to find out Yeah.
You know, because they tell us one thing,
like they're not ready and then we hear from community,
like, we can do this.
Just let us do this. So yeah.
Like what, what's your, what do you see like in that space?
A good question. Um, Yeah, because they tell
Probably not the most helpful answer, but
it's a mixture of those things.
And I think, um, actually, actually sometimes
communities don't know what they can actually do.
So I'll give you an example. So, um,
in lower HU here you've got have actually taken, um,
a Pepe into their care in custody.
Um, they didn't realize that that was possible.
So, and if you go around the country, others don't know
that you can actually, orang, tamari can delegate some
of their powers Yeah.
To iwi or other organizations.
And that's happening up in, um, Palmerston North with RAN
and Youth Justice, but others don't know what's possible.
So there's a real lack of information about, okay,
we can position ourselves now
to actually deliver in a particular way.
So there's that challenge. I think it is true
that in some communities you don't have providers who are
yet, um, at a maturity, um, to deliver.
Um, but that would just be in sum.
And so what is being done
to actually help build their capability so
that in two years time they are ready to step in.
Mm-hmm. And I mentioned this earlier about
how do you have funds that enable capability building
with a particular goal in mind?
And this requires strategic planning
over, over a number of years.
Where do you want to be in four years time?
I don't think that planning's necessarily been in place.
Yeah. So it's a mixture of all those answers,
but you've got other areas where you've got work going,
um, gangbusters, right?
So up in ana, not helpful phrase,
but Ana, you've got, um,
awa they've got a contact center now.
Yeah. They don't, they're getting delegation
and the results you're seeing from that are fantastic.
Now that's devolution, but when we talk about devolution,
it doesn't mean handing things over and walking away.
It still requires Oranga, AMI to be there to support it. Mm.
It's just that actually they hand over a lot of the control
and decision making, but it's not walking away either.
And a key thing there from my perspective is
that actually we are taking a learning mindset
to understanding how those initiatives are working
and what the learnings are
that can be applied in other parts of the country
through other partnerships.
Also, I've seen some really positive examples of, um,
iwi Social Services or Copa Maori Social Services teaming up
with, um, other children's NGOs.
Um, mutual sharing of knowledge
and capability, um, supporting the building
of capability gaps that might be there both ways.
And then actually, um, seeing outcomes
that really do serve, um, those, those Moana
and Whanau in ways that work for them
because it's grounded in a teamed up way of working
and a deep understanding of what the particular needs in
that local community are.
Yeah, and I think in fairness to providers too, you know,
they're potentially being asked to take on a lot of risk.
And so are they being given the, the tools
and the money to be able to go on and do that?
Well, and that can be a stumbling block as well.
And so, I mean, it's a mixture of things
that could be preventing this from progressing,
but the solutions are there
and it's pointing to work that's being done.
So again, I could go on, you know, up at,
with awa what's happened there is you've got the
Whakatane ARI site.
So reports of concern come into awa,
they decide which ones go for a statutory response
and go to Ang Tamari.
They then work at a community level
and make sure that reports are concern, all are seen,
whanau are visited, so they can put supports in place.
Now what's happened in Whakatane is there hasn't been a
reduction in services there.
This is about building up capacity and capability.
The challenge now is because of pressures on workforce KA
and social workers are having to come out
of Whakatane to support other sites.
And this is what happens when you then go
to take a good idea potentially.
And you take a pilot and you roll it out nationally,
you have to resource it in the same way,
otherwise you're not necessarily gonna
see the same successes.
And this is what sometimes happens in government when
we go to make something bigger.
'cause we don't invest in the way that we did
with the pilot, and then we wonder why it didn't succeed.
Mm. Yeah. Well come
To, uh, Willie, what,
um, was 1988?
1988, what did it tell us in 1988?
They told us that you were the problem.
That's what they said. They said
that the department was the problem,
that it was the worst form of institutional, not Q2,
of course, but it's not,
can I say I'm encourag I'm encouraged by the four year
was clear and, and the committee was clear
that the problem was with the department
and the institutional racism was the worst
form they had seen ever within your department.
And so that's what you have to work.
That's, that's what you have had to, um,
work with all these years.
And we're talking nearly 40 years ago. Mm-hmm.
And it took us, um, so many years
to actually recognize that.
And, and so I'm encouraged with what I'm hearing today.
Um, we attempted to, to change things dramatically
as you well know by putting in a, a whole Maori board, uh,
a Maori CEO, uh, uh, and what, and, and, uh,
and I was, uh, you know, it, it didn't go, it hasn't gone
as well as we wanted it to,
but I think the intention was admirable from, from us.
And, and, and what I'm hearing today is you're trying to
continue with that, uh, with that work,
understanding what's needed.
But you are dealing with peanuts, if I'm hearing you right.
You know, there's just not enough poo here to go out
because we, we, we were clear 40 years ago,
and we are clear today that Maori must be given an
opportunity to deal with their own.
Uh, but, uh, I, I, I, I wanna know compared to where we are
and where you are now, are you confident going forward?
Are you confident? Because, uh, you know, I I I'm, I'm clear
that there are good people, you know, as much
as I hammer this government,
I know there's some well-intentioned people in this
government who do want to, um, uh, get the same type
of change that, that we did.
I know that, um, uh,
but there are also people in this government
who has political agendas
because not just one group in, in this government,
where where are we?
Are we going to build on?
Because I think we made the start, you know, we,
we, we changed the board.
We brought in the ma Maori perspective.
Are we continuing along those lines
or are you, have you been hampered?
Um, are you discouraged?
Is the Pia just gonna be held up
because of the whole Maori thing.
Um, so just to be absolutely clear
is the oversight of Oranga Tam system, uh,
our two organizations and then the Ombudsman.
Our role is clearly to, um, for Aaron's team
to monitor the Orang TAM system, uh, for the ombudsman
to investigate complaints into the Orang Tamari system.
And from my end, um, to be the independent advocate for Ana,
uh, in Al, uh, including in the Orang Tamari system.
And so part of our focus is on holding Orang Tamari
and the wider children's system to account
to meeting the needs
and the rights of UNA in this country, including Moana,
Maori, and in my legislation children's commissioner at
2022, clear obligations
and duties on me as children's commissioner, um,
to place a significant, uh, priority focus on Mo Maori
and to uphold te in my mahi
and in Aaron's legislation specific requirements
around reporting on the outcomes of mu Maori, uh,
and Maori in the Orang Tamari system.
So I think from an accountability
and a monitoring perspective,
these are really important priorities
for us across our oversight of Orang Tamari system.
Does Orang Tamari
and the wider children's system need to do more
to fulfill the rights of mu Maori? Absolutely, yes.
Yeah, and I think, um, in our recent report on outcomes
for, uh, tamari Maori
and we, we flag a range of issues in terms
of what's preventing further progress, right?
So, you know, you think about, um, when, um,
the Children Young Persons Act came in, brought in,
replaced family group conferences in a way of working
that was, um, revolutionary at the time.
The challenges of what we are seeing is that
that opportunity to work that way isn't being taken up
because the family group conference processes eroded
to a point where it's just become an administrative function
that stands between getting a child into care as opposed
to doing it well, providing time
and space for whanau to come together in the right place
to actually get an outcome that works
for the family and the child.
So you've got opportunities there
that things are getting in the way in terms of the delivery
and working in the way they should.
Again, you've got programs within Ang about building
cultural capability, but it's then for their staff
to be able to have the time and the space
and the tools to work in the way they want.
So having, um, having Pier available just
to provide Kai at a, at a becomes a challenge,
actually implement the things that
you're wanting them to do.
And so unless you deal with some of these root cause issues,
you're not gonna see the change that you want.
Mm-hmm. And then it plays out in the contracting space
as well, which is what we've been talking again about today.
Mm-hmm. If you don't actually get to the root of, cause
what I've said at the start is it's just words without the
actions or the actions are limited. That's the challenge.
So what you're saying Is change the government, right.
Reading in between Well, that bit of politics.
We, we'll, uh, we've, I thank you very much.
We, we've gone well outta time.
Thank much appreciate very much so much.
You given us very, very important conversation that
Thank you, appreciate.